Felly, gallwch chi ddweud i mi eich anffaith a'ch adres a'ch cael ei gyrfa, yn fawr?
Ie, fy enw i yw Phyllis Patricia Perry.
A'ch cael ei gyrfa?
27 10 35.
Ddweud i ni ychydig o am eich ymddygiad, eich mam, eich dad, beth maen nhw wedi ei gyrfa a'i syblings.
Ie, dwi wedi cael un bro, un sylw.
Roedd fy fater yn manegor o ffartref Matthews and Clark ar y ddwyfnod.
Roedd fy sylw yn gyrfa a chanolion.
Roedd yn cael ei gyrfa.
Roedd fy bro yn gyrfa lle roedd fy fater.
Rhaid i fy marn oedd yn gwaith yn ddigwydd.
Roedd fy marn oedd yn gwrthio.
Roedd yn cael ei gyrfa yn Llynelli.
Roedd yn cael ei gyrfa yn Bridgend.
Roedd nhw'n mynd mewn iddynt i fy marn o'r ffartrefi.
Roedd ymlaen o 14 oed, a mi wedi fynd i fy marn o'r ffartrefi.
Roedd fy marn oedd yn ffartrefi.
Roeddych chi'n cael eich anffaith a'ch gyrfa yn Llynelli?
Mae'r fater yn cael ei ddod yn y Llanelli, felly roeddwn i.
Mae'r fater yn cael ei ddod yn Bridgend, mae hi'n cael ei ddod yn Bridgend, ei fater.
A'i gael ei ddod ar y ddod.
A fe ddodd yn y ddod yn y llwyf.
Felly, fe ddodd yn y llwyf, yn fawr iawn,
yn lleiaf lleiaf y byddai'n cael ei ddod.
A yna, mae'r fater ddodd, oherwydd mae'r fater,
pan oedd yn cael ei ddod yn y llwyf, roedd yn cael ei ddod yn Bridgend.
A, wrth gwrs, roeddwn i'n byw yn y Llanelli.
Roedd yn Bridgend, felly roeddwn i'n cael ei ddod, fel y ddodd,
roeddwn i'n cael ei ddod yn y prifau.
Felly, roeddwn i'n cael ei ddod o'r hyn, roedd yn eithaf yn eithaf.
Felly, beth oedd o'n oed yn ymwneud â'r Llanelli?
Roeddwn i'n ddod yn y 12.
Rwy'n ddod.
Felly, roeddwn i'n ddod o'ch edrych.
Efallai gallwch ddechrau o'n y Llanelli.
Felly, roeddwn i'n ddod o'ch edrych a'i ddod yn y Llanelli.
Beth ysgolion rydych chi'n mynd i'r hyn o'r hyn?
Felly, rwy'n mynd i ddod yn y Llanelli,
a byddai'n dda'n ddaeth yn dda.
Ond roeddwn i wedi'i gweithio yn y ddod, ynddo?
A yna, roeddwn i'n mynd i ddod yn y ddod o'r hyn.
A roeddwn i'n mynd yn dda'n dda'n dda.
Roedd yna y Llanelli?
Ie, roedd y Llanelli hefyd.
A yna, wrth gwrs, rydyn ni'n mynd i Brydgen.
A rydw i'n mynd i...
Roedd ysgolion yma yn Brydgen.
Beth yw'r hyn yw?
Mae'n ysgolion o'r holl ddod.
O, dwi ddim yn meddwl o'r hyn.
Felly, pan rydw i'n mynd i fynd yno,
roeddwn i'n mynd i ysgolion Puthcall.
A dyna ydw i'n mynd i Glynis, Dŵrín a phan o'r hyn.
Felly, beth o'n ei wneud pan oedd hi'n mynd i ysgolion?
14.
A oedd hynny'n rhywbeth y byddwch chi'n mynd i'w wneud neu byddwch chi'n mynd i roi i fynd i'r ysgolion?
Wel, rwy'n meddwl, yn oed yn y ddau,
byddai'n anodd yn y ddau yno,
pan oedd hi'n mynd i'w bryd,
roedd hi'n mynd i'r ysgolion a'i ddod oedd chi'n mynd i'r ysgolion.
Dwi ddim yn oed yn ymddygiol,
oherwydd roeddwn i wedi mynd i solytau o ddau.
Roeddwn i wedi mynd i ddifon o ddifon o ddifon o ddifon
pan oedd fy marn yn y ddau.
Felly, byddwn i wedi eu bryd i ddod o ddod o ddifon.
Ond, wrth gwrs,
yn y ddau ydych chi'n mynd i ddod,
ac wedi cael gwaith,
a chael gweithio,
a dyna sut roedd hi'n mynd i'w ddod, yw'n gwybod.
Felly, rydych chi'n cael gwaith yn…
sut ydych chi'n cael gwaith yn y boxfetru?
Roedd yn y ddau fy marn.
Oherwydd roedd hi'n gweithio yno pan roedd hi'n mynd i ddod o ddifon.
Roeddwch chi'n cael gwybod am y cysylltiad?
Nid.
Nid, roeddwn i ddim.
Rhywbeth, roedd fy marn yn gweithio yno
ac roedd e'n gweithio y ddau,
dwi'n credu bod nhw'n cymryd fy ennol.
Felly roedd hi'n gweithio y ddau yn gweithio y ddau?
Ie.
Roeddwch chi'n gwybod unrhyw unrhyw un o'r ddau
o'r ddau o ddau yw?
A oedd unrhyw un o'r bobl oedd yn ystod ymlaen?
Nid oedd o'r ffordd o fy nghyfn.
Mae'n rhaid i'w ddod o'r ffordd, ond fel Doreen a hynny.
Ond roedd yn ffwrdd o'r ffordd oedd.
Oherwydd roedd yna dda yn dda i weithio'n dda.
Roedd e'n rhaid i chi fod yn dda i gael ymlaen pan oedd e'n ystod ymlaen?
Roedd e'n rhaid i chi fod yn dda i gael ymlaen pan oedd e'n dda i gael ymlaen?
Rwy'n meddwl, oherwydd roedd e'n rhaid i fi fynd yn y...
Dwi'n hoffi bod yna dda'r bobl oedd yn cael ei ddod oedd.
Mae'n dda i gael ymlaen.
Roedd e'n dda i gael y ffyrdd oedd, a'n gael ei ddod oedd, a'n gael ei ddod oedd.
A mewn i gael y ffyrdd oedd, roeddwn i'n ymlaen.
Mae'n dda i gael ymlaen.
Roeddwn i'n dda i gael ymlaen.
Felly dyna'r ymlaen.
Dyna'r ymlaen, iawn.
Felly, dweud i mi,
beth yw'r ffactoriaid,
beth yw'r product ymlaen o'r ffactoriaid,
yw'r ffactoriaid wedi gwneud?
Mae'n gwybod,
bob boxiau, gallwch chi ddweud,
boxiau profion, boxiau ciocnog,
rywfaint,
fe wnaethon nhw'r boxiau.
A bob ffaer a'r bryd?
Mae'n ffyrdd a'r ffaer,
a'r ffaer mwyaf i'r ffaer mwyaf.
Mae'n dda i gael ymlaen.
Roeddwn i'n dda.
Ydych chi'n dweud,
roedd yn lle i gael gwaith,
a'r ffaer a'r bwg yn gweithio ar y ffactoriaid?
Mae'n dda i gael gwaith.
Dwi ddim yn gweld unrhyw bobl yma
yn y ffaer a'r ffaer.
Rwy'n gorau i gyrraedd i weithio.
Yn y ffaer,
ym mhaer ym mhaer ym mhaer.
Roeddwch chi'n cyllir, yna?
Rwy'n cyllir, oherwydd,
a'n cyllir.
Beth oedd eich rhaglen?
Gallwch chi ddod o?
Mae'n dda ychydig munud o ffrin.
Mae'n dda
un awr i gyrraedd
ac yna
am ddod ychydig rhaglen yn y ffaer.
A beth wneud chi
yn y ffaer?
Mae'n dda
y canthin,
a'n dda.
Mae'n dda.
Mae gennym ddod o'n ffaer
yn y ffaer.
Mae'n dda
yn dda.
Mae'n dda.
Oherwydd,
treic prosperous o tutorial
11.
Eenebannyn
15.
Te or sandwich
belts
hyllyw pouse
26.
Beth y diwrnod ydw,
typical ydy môr
28 and who
who
IT um over fwy na e. Yw penyn piecesュ ar dryr.
Roedd yr addressed yn rhan hyd a llwy
Roeddwn i'n ffwrdd iawn i'w ddod o'i.
Roeddwn i'n meddwl, oherwydd roedd fy marn oedd yno hefyd,
a roedd yn un o'r marn o'r marn oedd wedi'i edrych arno arno.
Pan roeddwn i'n mynd i'r brifysgol, roedd yn ystod y ddau'r Lichulus,
y ddau'r Imbrogend.
Felly, gweld yn llawer o'r ddau,
byddwch yn meddwl, oeswn i'n mynd i'r ddau,
ond roeddwn i'n ddiddordeb.
Beth oedd e'n edrych arno?
Beth oedd e'n ddynnu arno?
Felly, gallwch chi dynnu'r glw a phethau fel hyn i'r brifysgol.
Dwi ddim yn hoffi hynny'n bach,
ond, ym mhob, unrhyw beth oherwydd, roedd yn dda.
Pa ganddyn nhw wedi gweithio yno, o'n mynd?
Yn y brifysgol?
Oedd un peth dŵr.
Roeddwn i'n meddwl,
gallai bod 200 o'r ddau,
iawn, dda.
Mae'n dda, a'n dda,
a'r hollol gwaith a'r adnoddau,
mae'n dda, a'r hollol dda.
A oedd hynny'n dda ar gael,
ar gael a phobl, neu'n bach?
Ar gael.
Yn oherwydd, mae'r mŵyn yn ddynnu'r gwaith,
os oes eu gwneud yn iawn,
roeddwn i'n dda.
A'r bos, y manegor yna,
Bryn James, roedd hi wedi'i gael.
A roedd y manegor o'r ffactor yna,
neu roedd hi'n gweithio ar y ffactor Lundain.
Felly, roedd yn dda ar gael
un ddau ar gael yna,
pan oedd yn gweithio yno,
roedd yn dda ar gael y peth y byddech chi'n ei wneud?
Pan roeddwn yn y gwaith,
a'n gweithio'r gwaith,
roedd yn dda ar gael,
a'r bobl yn gweithio ar y ffactor,
ac roedd yn gweithio fel hyn.
Ond gallwn ni siarad,
ac maen nhw'n gweithio ar,
gallwch chi siarad os ydych chi eisiau.
Felly roedd yn dda ar gael,
roeddwn i'n edrych i fynd i weithio,
oherwydd o'r ffactor roedd yn dda.
Felly, roedd yn y gwaith o'r ffactor?
Roedd yn y ffactor, yma.
Roedd yn y gwaith.
A pan oedd yn cael ei ddod o'r blwc,
roedd yn cael ei ddod yn gyflawni'n beth,
ac yna roedd yn mynd i'r gwells yn y botw,
ac roedd yn cael ei ddod yn y bobl,
yn cael ei ddod yn y bobl,
yn y bobl.
Ie, yn dda.
A oes gennych chi ddod o'r ffactor?
Ie, roedd yn y gwaith.
Roedd yn y gwaith.
Gwnaethon i gael,
mae'r ffactor hynny,
gwnaethon ni'n dda,
yn dda, yn dda.
A os oedd o'r ffactor,
roedden nhw'n ddod o'r ffactor,
a'r ffactor yn cael ei ddod yn y bobl.
Mae'n dda, yn dda, yn dda.
Roedd o'r ffactor yn gwneud yn y canthin,
os oedd o'r ffactor?
Nid, nid yn dda.
Mae'r un o'r ddod yn mynd i Mrs Jobe,
mae'r ddod yn chef,
mae'r ddod yn y canthin,
a phat y byddwn yn gwneud y cac,
a byddwn yn synghau i'r ddod,
yn dda, yn dda, yn dda.
Mae'r boxau yna,
roedden nhw'n dda,
yn dda, yn dda,
yn dda, yn dda, yn dda.
Roeddwn i'n dweud,
roedden ni'n cael regex yn ôl,
oherwydd, yna,
os oedd yn y gwaith,
oedd angen gwaith ymlaen
o'r pwmpen o'r ffactor,
rydych chi'n dda i ddod glw yn y canlyniadau
a yna rydych chi'n dda i ddod yn ôl.
Ac yn dda, yn dda, yn dda,
rydych chi'n dda i ddod yn ôl.
A'r boxau yna'n dda i ddod yn ôl.
Ond fel y ddod, roedd hi'n cael morthezau arnyn nhw.
Mae hynny'n dda.
Felly, oedd nhw'n cael eu cymryd
gyda phethau o'r ddod yn nhw,
neu oherwydd…
Oherwydd bod hi'n morthezau.
Roedd hi'n cael ei chael,
yn dda.
Roedd hi'n cael morthezau, oes?
Ie.
Mae'r boxau oedd yn dod yn ôl
ac rydych chi'n dda i ddod yn ôl angen.
Ond roedd hi'n cael ei chael.
Felly, beth oedd o'n dda i ddod
i'r morthezau yna?
Mae'n dda.
Ac un peth o'r ddod yn dda.
A oes gennych chi'n dda
pa mor o bwynt i chi
pan oeddwch chi'n cael gweithio yno?
Mae'n dda.
Dwi'n credu bod yna £2 i'w start.
A yna,
dwi'n credu bod gennym
£250 o beth oedd.
Ie.
Mae'n dda.
A beth oeddwn yn siarad amdano yma?
Yn oed.
Roeddwn i'n 14.
Felly beth oedd yn oed yno?
Roeddwn i'n siarad
49?
Beth oeddwch chi'n ddweud?
Ie, byddwn yn oed yno.
49.50?
Ie, byddwn yn oed yna.
Yn oed.
Beth oeddwch chi'n ei wneud gyda'r fath o?
Rwy'n rhoi'r mwyaf o'n
i fy mwyaf.
Ac yna beth oeddwn i wedi gael gweithio.
Roeddwn i'n ffyrdd.
Roeddwn i'n cael 200 partner
pan oeddwn yn mynd i Grimraen.
Roeddwn i'n cael gweithio 2 ffyrdd.
Roeddwn i'n byw yn Caerfyn yna yn ystod.
Roeddwn i'n byw yn Caerfyn i gael Cymfeig.
Gweithio yno
ac yn ystod yno am y beth yma.
Felly,
roeddwn i'n cael gweithio am y beth.
Ac yna ydw i ddim yn gallu
ddod unrhyw ddau yn y canthu.
Pan oedd y ffyrdd wedi'i gael gweithio?
Oeddwn i'n siarad.
Roeddwn i'n
roi'r fath oedd
48, 49
50 arall yno.
Roeddwn i'n byw yn Bryn Mernin.
Roeddwn i'n byw yn Brynt
yng Nghymru yn ddiweddar.
Rwy'n siarad yn ystod y peth yma.
Roeddwn i'n siarad yn y ffyrdd newydd
yma,
a'i ddod yn y canthu
yna,
oherwydd,
yn y ffyrdd angen,
dydyn ni ddim yn cael canthu.
Rwy'n siarad.
Roeddwn i'n siarad yn y ffyrdd angen.
Mae'n ffyrdd angen iawn,
ond yn dda.
Ond,
yn Bryn Mernin,
oherwydd roedd y ffyrdd angen,
yn dda iawn.
Pa yw'r ffacilafau
ar y canthu ac y tolydd?
Ymlaen i'r
ffacilau angen,
y tolydd, popeth,
yno. Mae'n dda iawn.
Beth am ymlaen ymlaen ymgyrch, yw, yw, rwy'n meddwl yw,
ond y llwythiwn a'r llwythiwn, beth yw hynny?
Mae hynny'n dda iawn, hefyd, a'r llwythiwn, oherwydd roedd hi'n cael ymlaen
ymlaen ymlaen ymlaen, ond y boel hwn.
A oedd hynny'n dda iawn yn y ffactor dynol? A oedd hynny'n dda iawn i'w gweithio ar unrhyw amser?
A oedd pobl yn credu ei fod yn rhaid i'w gweithio oherwydd yna oedd anhygoel?
Rwy'n credu bod hynny'n cael ei gweithio un neu ddwy.
Rwy'n credu bod hynny'n cael anhygoel, a'u bod yn dda,
roedd y brydau oedd yn dda iawn, yw hynny.
Ond rydym wedi gweithio drwy'r bryd, rydym wedi gwneud y beth.
Roedd y beth yma…
O, dwi'n dda, dwi ddim yn ymwneud â'r beth yma, yn eich bod…
Roedd eich mam yn cael eu beth o'ch bach yma, yw eich mam?
Yn oed, oes y 2 £, neu 250, dwi'n gael y mwyaf o'r beth.
A dwi'n cael am un £ i fy hun, yw hynny.
Ond roedd fy mam yn dda i'n cael ei beth i'i ddod.
Felly roeddwn i'n cael ei gael i'i ddod.
A oedd hynny'n dda fel hyn, o oedd yn…
Yn oed, roedd yn cael eich mam yn dda i'i ddod?
Ie, oherwydd roeddwn i'n edrych yn fawr i'r bach, yn eich bod yn dda,
oherwydd roeddwn i'n credu, o'n i'n gallu brynu blwg neu'r scot yn y ddod.
Ond roeddwn i'n mynd i'r holl, a roedd fy mam yn dda i'n dda i'n dda.
Roedd fy fater yn cael ei beth yn dda, yn dda, dwi ddim yn dda, yn eich bod yn dda.
Felly roeddwn i ddim yn gallu gweld fy fater yn dda, felly roeddwn i'n gallu gweld hynny yn y ddod.
Ie, mae'n dda, mae'n dda.
Felly roeddwn i ddim wedi cael llawer o fath o'ch hunain?
Nid, roeddwn i ddim wedi.
Roeddwn i'n ei fwyaf o'n i'n ddod oherwydd roeddwn i'n gael i Glynus a Doreen,
ac roeddwn i'n mynd i Gen i Bryntirion.
Roeddwn i'n mynd i'r ffotoedd, roeddwn i'n dda.
Roeddwn i'n dda?
Rwyf wedi ei ddod yn dda.
Roeddwn i'n dda.
Roeddwn i dda.
Ie, yn bwysig.
Do you remember how much that was?
I can't at the moment to be honest with you.
It'll come back to me.
This was where I thought if I could go and touch the secretary
that she was in Underpartners
she'd know all the answers.
All right, yeah, yeah.
Erm,
what I was going to ask you was about overtime.
You said there was, er, did you work
shifts at all in the factory
or was it always those hours?
It was always those hours, yeah.
But you could work overtime sometimes?
They would ask you, yes,
would you like to work overtime?
And I jumped to it every time.
And when did you do the overtime?
Was it in the evening or was it on a Saturday?
In the evening
after 5.
And sometimes they would say,
could you come in Saturday morning?
And we never turned it down
because it was extra money, you know.
Was it a different
rate for overtime or was it the same
rate? I mean, was it like
time and a half or was it, you know,
that kind of thing?
I'm not quite sure,
to be honest with you.
I can get that for you.
You know. Yes.
OK.
What about unions
in the factory? Were there any unions
in the factory?
No, we didn't have a union. You didn't? No.
Right. No, I know
that for a fact we didn't have one.
Right. OK. Were the management
opposed to that or was it
that the workers
weren't interested? What do you think?
I think the workers
were so overwhelmed
with how it was run
that they didn't see any need
of having a union, you know.
So there were no disputes,
nothing like that?
No, can't remember them anyway.
Except for this time when people were a bit cold.
Yeah. And if you did
have a dispute about something,
you just made an appointment and you saw
the management, you know,
and they'd sort it out for you. Or you tell
your supervisor or the
boss of the floor.
Yeah, it was a really happy place, to be
honest with you. So you think
they were really good employers, do you?
Wonderful. Yeah. Absolutely wonderful.
Yeah.
I mean, I hadn't worked
for anywhere else, so I don't know.
But I just thought every
factory was like this one, because they were so good.
Yes.
What about holidays then?
What kind of holidays did you
remember when you had holidays?
Always the miners
holiday. We always,
a fortnight it was closed.
Seemed to work around the miners,
didn't they, you know?
Never went away anywhere.
And were they paid holidays then?
You was paid
your fortnight off, yes.
And what about bank holidays?
Yes, they were good there and they still,
you know, you still had your money,
you know, for the holidays and everything.
They were really
good to us, really.
And when you allowed
days off for
special occasions,
would you have remembered
anything, you know,
or a funeral or something like that?
Do you remember anything like that?
If you asked them,
or tell them, look, I got this and such
a date,
they didn't mind at all.
Because, but if
you done it and you hadn't
asked them, I don't think they liked that,
you know. So they'd have you in
to see why you hadn't
been in to ask, you know.
And would you be paid for those days,
or would it be unpaid leave?
If you went, it would be
unpaid leave, yes.
What about
uniform then? Did you
wear a uniform, or did
you wear, did
they provide you with a uniform,
or did you provide yourself
with a uniform? When we were in the old
factory,
we wore what we wanted to wear,
you know. But
I can remember,
we all had to go into the office,
and they were saying that they were going to
put you in a, like a green dress
it was, with a nice collar
and things. And
we all wore those dresses,
and I was thrilled to bits with them.
But not, not everybody
added, anyone's compulsory.
But I
thought they were very nice.
And did they provide you with a... They provided you
with them, yes.
And did they clean them and things, or did you...
You were to
keep them tidy, you know, wash them
and iron them.
I was
boss with Mr Reeves,
and he did like
girls to look nice and respectful,
you know. I would say that
about him. Did you have
to
wear any other protective
wear at all?
Not when I was on the
band, when it used to, the paper
used to go around the box and fill
it in.
Nothing there. You had to pull this
thing down, there was a knife attached to it.
But when I was on the corner stair,
like I showed you my sister,
you shoved in four corners,
you had finger guards.
Alright.
So do you think the work was dangerous
in any way?
No, not really.
If you weren't sensible though, and you weren't
wearing those, you could squash your finger,
you know.
Squash rather than cut them?
You'd squash it, yeah, because the thing would
come down and squash your finger.
Do you remember any
accidents or people, you know...
Yeah, I do.
I had my corner stair here,
and there was an SNS machine
there where she used to take
the boxes, put them on this big
block and press the pedal,
and then it would go down into the machine,
and where we used to fold them by hand,
this machine would do it, you know.
And I had to scream, and
no, her hand had gone down, you know.
Yeah, she had a bad finger.
Bad finger?
Yeah, but she went, well,
they took her to hospital,
but it wasn't serious,
so stitched her up a bit.
But if you're not
concentrating on what you're doing,
you could have a bad accident, especially
on them SS machines.
Can you explain what the SS
machine was then?
It was a really
big machine, this SS,
and they had a...the big machine
was here, and they'd
have a conveyor belt going down
like that, and there was a girl on the end
packing them.
And when they were
doing the SNS, she'd be up in her chair,
and there was a girl gluing
and putting the paper in, and then
she'd got the glue, and then she'd had to get
the four corners on this
box, and
then she'd put it on this big block,
and that's when she pressed the pedal.
When you'd hear it going down,
it would be folding all the
paper in, you see.
And then it would come back up, shoot
on the conveyor belt, and she used to stack them
up on the end.
Did you ever have a go on the SS
machine? No, I didn't, to me, I'll say.
My sister was on the SS machine.
She was good at it.
Was it a kind of
specialised job then, do you think?
Well, they had four of them, you see,
big machines, and
I think the bosses,
and if they thought you were good at something,
they'd really keep you on there, you know.
Because
like the ones where you wear the
finger things,
where you put it on, and you
get the two corners together, press the
pedal, then you'd move it on, and
you'd press it again.
I was on there, not very long,
and I could keep the pedal down into the
four corners.
It was brilliant. And then, of course,
they sent somebody out then, because
you were doing so many,
they'd send somebody out behind you,
evaluating it, how you were doing it, you know.
Was that the time in motion
person? Yes.
Yes. So they'd
see then how many?
How you were doing, yes.
And use it to measure other people?
Yes.
Because really sometimes
you'd spoil it for somebody else, because
you were so fast on the machine,
and the more you do, the better it was
for you. And of course, some of the girls
couldn't do it, so you weren't doing them
any favors, really.
But that's the way I like to work, you know.
I was paid for doing it, so
I'd give my own.
Yes. Did you
have any piecework at all?
Was it any piecework, or was it just
a kind of rate?
You know, for how many boxes
you could do?
Yes, they expected you to do so many,
you know what I mean, after that.
I think you had a bit
extra for what you were doing over,
you know. So that's why
I used to do them so quick.
Yes.
So were you aware of people
having different wages,
you know, for different jobs?
Or was it basically
the same kind of wage,
with a bit extra for piecework?
I think we were more or less
all on the same.
Except there was loads of tables going
down, and the packers,
called them packers,
and they'd be packing the boxes in this
brown paper, and sealing
all them up. Then they'd go to the
loading bale, and
the fella from London
used to pick them up, and take
them back up to the factory in London.
I think they were
on the best money, really.
The packers? The packers, they used to call them.
And were they women as well?
All women, yes.
When do you think they had to
work more then?
I don't know, I don't know really, no.
But it wasn't a hard
job really, but if they got the big boxes,
it's
more what's called then, you know.
More physical. Yeah, and they had to,
I think to get where they went to the dog
war, they had to keep
at it, you know.
Were you made aware of any kind
of rules and regulations while you
worked in the factory?
No, only to wear, if you had to wear
guard things,
they'd nip around and they'd see if
you got them on, you know.
And we had
a nurse there.
We had a nurse's
room, you know. So they'd
leave everything on, tidy really.
So were you made aware of health and
safety then? Yes.
Yes.
What about the noise in the factory, was it noisy?
It was noisy
because there was the big SS machines
and everything, and
your corner stair wasn't too
noisy, but you got used
to it, you know.
And anybody were?
No protection
on the ears, no. And it wasn't
that bad really, you know.
I was going
to ask you about the women who worked
there then. Were you all
young women or were you
all married, married?
Did people have children, that kind of thing?
Yeah, there was lots of young girls
like myself.
There was older women. I found
the older women were on the packing.
And
there was women
there that had children.
There was all sorts there. Were there any
childcare facilities then?
No, no.
No, none.
Can I ask you a bit more
then about
the kind of social
aspect?
You said there was a
evening every Tuesday.
Were there other things put on
by the factory, like Christmas parties,
that kind of thing? Can you remember
anything about that?
Oh yes, I'm sure we would have had a Christmas party,
yes.
Do you remember where you went?
Where you used to go? I think when
we were in the new factory, that was in the
canteen as well, because it was a big canteen,
you know. And he'd let us
put decorations
all over our machines and things like that.
That was a really nice time.
And he didn't mind us singing.
We used to sing as loud as we could.
It was really nice.
And did they use to make the food and everything
in the canteen then for the...I mean,
was it a kind of dinner dance?
Oh yes, yes. It was our food
laid down.
Because Mrs Jobe, the head cook,
she made my wedding cake.
She was really good.
Oh, did she?
Yes.
And I got pregnant then.
I was married.
And I fell straight away
for a baby, because
my husband didn't want me to work, you see,
when I got married.
And I loved it there so much.
But there was another girl with me
her name was
Barnes. And she was
pregnant as well.
So he took us off the machines,
this is how good they were really.
And he put us in
another part where,
you know,
the boxes that all you wear in cake up,
the silver ones, we had to
do them by hand.
Just in case we
stood in a trolley or we had an accident,
they were so good.
Yes.
How did you feel about your husband
not wanting you to work when he got married?
I was gutted really.
I really was.
I loved it there so much, you know.
How long were you there for
before you got married then?
Oh, I got married in 56.
And I
left and some partners then
for a while. And I went
student nursing.
So I
just couldn't, I couldn't
take to it really. And I thought, well,
I loved it, but if my
husband didn't want me to work, I didn't want
to do all this, you know.
So I did go back into the factory
and the partners.
Because when I walked through the door,
they just said to me, are you back?
They were so good.
So you
worked there for a while before you got married?
Oh, years, yes, years.
So how did you,
I mean, did you have to stop
straight away then when
you got married?
No, you got
pregnant. Yes.
And I worked there, still worked there.
And my
husband owned a farm the other side of this
mountain. And I said,
oh no, because he was so lonely in the
farm, my mother-in-law was there.
But I thought, no, I missed
the girls, you know what I mean.
So they did let me work
as long as I could.
And after I'd had the baby, I
took him to work when he was a few weeks
old. Oh, did you? Yeah.
So I remember the management
coming out and they said,
that was the problem, was it?
Oh, you're
so good to work for. Yeah.
Yeah.
Why do you think your husband didn't
want you to work? Was it because
it was the factory or was it
work in general, do you think?
I
think
it was because they had
the farm and they had so much to
do on the farm.
I must have thought I'd be better off helping
them on the farm than going to work.
But I worked as
long as I could.
To be honest with, I used to
walk down the lane from Corker
to Rywkeelwch Chapel
and then walk along the road because
Wyn Tarw Coleray was
there. And I used to get
on the best because my husband used
to couldn't take me, he was
working in a factory somewhere as well as
a farm. So
I got so used to it that
I always remember there was a man
called Barba from Aberkef,
and he'd see me coming and he'd
put his coat down for me to walk on
to get on the best.
It's so kind.
So it wasn't
all easy, you know what I mean.
So you must
have really missed
the camaraderie. Oh, I did.
Really missed it.
Yes.
But do you think it was because
it was factory work especially, or was
it just any kind of work that he didn't
want you to work?
Any kind of work
I think he would have.
But I could say, no I'm not,
I'm going, you know what I mean, and I do it.
Yes.
But of course
you had to give up when you were
pregnant. Did you have to give up when you were pregnant?
Well they let me
stay in the factory.
Colin was born
in the October,
and I think I finished about
a month before.
Right.
He came to me there.
So
what did you do then?
Well once I had the baby
that was it.
You had a baby, you had to look after
the baby and things like that.
And then fifteen
months later I was pregnant again.
And that went along
until I had five children.
So my life
was around my children then.
Yes.
You said
you were allowed to chat while you were working.
What kind of thing did you talk
about in to you?
Well you should say that.
I went to St. David's Church the other day.
I think I told you I had somebody tap me on the shoulder.
And it was a friend
from the box factory.
And we started
laughing because we used to,
if I had seen a nice film, I'd be
telling her about the film.
And then she was really engrossed
in it and then she'd tell me a film.
You know what I mean? Oh yeah,
really good.
So it was that kind of
telling stories, yeah.
But it didn't stop you
still carried on working you know.
How did you
buy new clothes and things like that?
Did your mum used to give you
money for clothes or did you save
the little money
I had? I didn't have many clothes
to be honest with you. That's what I,
when I worked overtime I'd take all lovely blouse
on the weekend. But nothing materialised
out of that. But
the one that
was very kind to me, I had an uncle
in Llanelli and he used to come to see us.
And he always put a pound in my hand.
And all lovely.
So I used to buy my own clothes
then you know to me.
What I could afford I get you know.
That was a lot of money then if you were
only earning two pounds something.
It was, do, best uncle I ever had.
Used to own
snips in
Swansea.
I think it was.
I think it was snips.
Man's clothing shop
you know.
Very kind. My sister and I always rubbed
our hands when we saw him coming.
Were people allowed
to smoke in the factory?
Or where did they smoke?
Yes,
they could smoke in the factory.
On the floor? Yes.
While they were making the boxes?
I think that
well.
Because I was the smoker.
No I think we had to eat a lot of times.
Right, so where did you
smoke then? In the canteen?
In the canteen, yes.
On a nice day we were outside.
Do you think you've suffered any
long term effects from working in the
factory? Ill health or anything
like that?
No I don't think so. I don't think
there was anything there that would harm you.
Except in the old factory
most probably they had these
what do they call them, on the roof.
Asbestos sheets.
Oh right yes. Did anybody suffer
from that? Not that I
can recall.
What about the glue?
Did that used to?
When I went there first it used
to make me feel a bit sicky.
You know the smell it was.
But there again you got used
to it. Yes, well it
no ill effects from
sniffy glue I was going to say.
No, it was only the glue that they put in
when she's taken the paper off the
big S machines.
The big glue thing you know.
But as for the other ones if you're working
on the side and you're doing the small boxes
that glue was okay.
Do you remember
how did you get on with
the male workers in the
factory? I know there weren't many of them
were there. But were the
relationships good between the
men and women? Yes, wonderful.
Yes, really wonderful.
Did you used to tease each other?
If Charlie come to do your machine
he tease
you, you know what I mean.
But we used to give him as good as he gave us
sort of thing. He always laughed.
They were very, very
nice.
Do you remember any
day trips or anything like that
you went on from the factory?
The only trip I can remember is going
to Barton Fair, whatever that was.
I remember going on that.
Where is that? I don't know.
In England somewhere. In England somewhere, yes.
Who arranged that then?
I think the boss would put
it on to the supervisors
to see who wanted to go and
things like that.
I can't remember how much
it cost.
How did you go?
They put on a vest there.
Did a crowd of you go?
Yes, the vest was always full.
Do you remember what you
did of a day? How long
was the day? That kind of thing?
They'd give you most of the day there.
We'd go around Barton Fair
it was called.
We'd go around there,
what we liked, and then we'd go and have
something sweet.
That sort of thing. There was a beach
there if I remember.
What kind of fair was it? Was it
a market or was it a fairground?
It was a fairground,
a big one.
That was the original.
That was the main one that I can gather
then. Huge rides.
Not like they had
a day in mind but we thought it was huge rides.
Do you remember how
when did you get home at night?
Was that a very long day?
Was it a far away?
Yes, it was a long day.
It was quite dark when we got back.
All shattered
but nice.
On your holidays
holidays you didn't used to go
away did you?
No, I could never afford to go away.
I knew the news of it in them days
that they went to Tenerife
in Spain and Hong Kong and places
like that.
Push call, that was about it.
Or Sathertown.
We used to go on our
bikes, all us girls
we had a bike. Dorian sold me
her bike. We had to give her
three pence a week.
We all used to go on our
bikes. So you went with your
childhood friends rather than your
factory friends? Yes, some of the girls
in the factory would join us.
So tell me about the canteen.
Shirley Davis was one of the girls
and we'd sit together
in the canteen.
My mother used to open my
box and my mother used to give us
bread and bits and
a stick of celery.
She used to open her
box and she had lovely beetroot sandwiches
and a bit of cheese on the side
and I used to think, ooh.
She always gave me one.
Then we ended up there and she said,
what if we now have the sandwiches
and have a plate
of chips between us?
We started doing that
and really loved it.
Do you think it was a physically demanding work?
Did you feel maybe a little bit underfed?
In which way, no.
Do you think it was physically demanding,
the work?
Just long hours?
It was long hours, yes.
That was one thing about it.
But that's how they were, factories in
them days, weren't they?
Yes, but we never moaned about it.
We just got on with it.
And you were a growing girl,
of course, you were only 14.
That's right, yes.
When I left then, really,
to get married, 21.
Right.
Would you have liked to have gone back
to work in the factory when you were a child?
If I hadn't had one every 15 months,
I think I would have had somebody
to look after and I would have.
But I had a responsibility
to the children.
You say that the woman in the canteen,
the cook made your wedding cake.
Mrs Job.
Made your wedding cake.
How did that come about?
Did you ask her?
Well, my sister got married
here before me.
She married a fellow in that photo
I showed you.
She used to take the boxes back up to London
and fell for Joan and they got married.
And Mrs Job made their cake.
So you went by and then I got married.
And we came up in the canteen then.
Mrs Job was on about the cake.
I said, would you mind to be mine?
Not at all, she said.
So it was three hearts.
It was really lovely.
So how did that go then?
Did you pay for the ingredients
and she made it?
Did you pay her to make it?
She made the complete cake
and then I had to pay her.
But my dad helped out there.
What do you remember about it,
the taste and things?
Was it a good cake?
Oh, beautiful, absolutely beautiful.
Did you say it was a three tier?
Three tier, three hearts.
Yeah, lovely.
She was a really good cook.
And the lady that I went to get in touch with,
Mrs Job was her mother.
The secretary in the box factory.
So I am sure Mrs Job would have had
a nice lot of photos.
So I'll have to try and get in touch with her.
So do you remember going out with
your colleagues anywhere else?
Did you see them?
No, I didn't.
Anyone else?
Did you used to see them on the weekend?
Yes, we used to go to St Athens on a Friday.
I never used to tell my mother.
That's the wicked thing I'd done.
Because my father always wanted to know where you were.
When I went dancing,
he'd be there waiting in the bus stop
for you to be on that last bus with him,
you know, before he lived in Brinteria.
And he was really wonderful like that, you know.
He was really good.
So what was in St Athan then?
What did he do?
He was a dancer, a big dancer,
and all the girls used to go.
And the bus used to pick him up behind Woolworths in Bridgend.
We'd all be looking out for our fathers
because he used to tell our fathers.
And then I used to stay in my friend's house.
My mother would let me stay with my friend in Saan.
And we had a really nice weekend.
But then we'd go dancing then.
That was Friday.
We'd go to the town hall in Bridgend on a Saturday.
We'd go to the Palli di Dance on a Wednesday.
If there was a dance on, we were there, you know.
So how did you get to all these places?
By bus.
And were there late buses to get you back?
Or did you have to be indoors?
We had a private bus going to St Athan.
But going to Bridgend,
when I lived in Brinteria,
we could walk, you see.
It was a good place.
And I was a bit worried.
I was worried about my father.
But in Brinteria, we could walk, you see.
It was a gang of us.
So, really nice.
So in St Athan,
were you looking for RAF boys to dance with?
They were all RAF boys, yeah.
I did meet a nice RAF boy there.
Very nice.
But you married somebody else?
I married somebody else, yeah.
A stranger he goes, innit?
Oh.
So, right.
Can I just ask you then,
did you enjoy working in the factory?
I loved it.
Were you ever bored, or was it monotonous?
Sometimes it went a bit slack
on the jobs that you were to do.
And then they'd give you another job,
or go and sit by your machine
and turn in the boxes in for her, you know.
And I don't think I was bored
because you were talking all the time, you know.
And it didn't interrupt your work as you were talking.
It was really nice.
I would advise anyone to have gone to work there.
Oh, and we did have a trip to the London factory
for us to see how they were doing, you know.
Same thing, SS machines, corner machines.
When my sister married Bob,
she went in the factory in London
because that's where he was from, you know.
So, and they used to put, good morning.
Hi.
She's my grandson.
So this trip to the London factory,
was that a social occasion?
They used to put a social evening on for us.
They'd show us around the factory and the girls there.
And they did put a social evening on for us.
Did you do it more than once then?
Yes, I can remember doing it about twice.
So you used to go up to London.
Did you used to come back the same day
or did you used to stay up there?
Back the same day, yeah.
And was that again on a coach?
Yes, yeah. All laid on.
So, and they put a kind of social evening on for you?
Yes, and you had food, you know, sandwiches, cakes, you name it.
A bit of dancing?
Yeah.
Did you make friends with anybody up there?
Well, I did.
I met my sister's husband before she did, you know.
And it was very funny because he said,
when he was down in Bridgend,
he said, all those girls in the factory, you know,
he said, I was looking around, he said, and I picked two girls.
I said, oh, very nice.
He said, you were the first,
and he didn't know she was my sister.
And she was the second.
She married him.
Yes.
So, when you left because you were pregnant,
did you have a farewell party or anything like that when you left?
No, no, nothing like that.
Are you in contact with your former workmates from the factory?
No, only the one I met last week.
And Iris had been up here.
No, Sheila had been up here, the one that's worked in the factory.
She came up here, I think it was November, August, round about there.
So, I can get in touch with her again, you know.
And she brought this girl Anne up,
and she used to be on an SNS machine.
And did you know her in the factory?
Yes, oh yes, I knew Anne as well.
But really your family took over then?
You weren't in kind of continuous contact with them?
No, no.
But you've kept contact with your childhood friends?
Yes.
Looking back now, how do you feel about the time you spent working in the factory?
I would love it all over again.
That's how good it was, you know.
Why do you think that was?
I think it was the atmosphere there, and the management was so good too.
I mean, they had their rules, you weren't supposed to run and things like that.
Like you said, smoking.
I remember now we weren't allowed to smoke, only in the canteen or outside.
But they were so good to us.
Mind you, Mr Reeves, the manager, very, very nice man.
But we all stood up to him then, like he said, we were strict, you know.
We all treated him with respect.
Do you think you'll miss the independence?
Yes.
When I met Mr Reeves, Mrs Jordan made a cricket cake.
Her daughter phoned me up, oh I'm going back.
My sister was alive then.
And she phoned me up to say, I'm going back about five years, my sister's gone.
About six years now.
She said, would you like to come down this evening?
She said, Pat, she said.
She lives in Brinkheath Inn.
I said, oh, what's this about?
She said, Mr Reeves will be here from London.
And seeing him all those years.
And some of the girls from the box factory.
Boys, I'd love it.
So we were all in her house where we chatted all night over the factory.
Can I just clarify, this is Mrs Job who made the cake for you?
Her daughter.
Yes, Sheila Morgan.
So what was that like then?
It was strange because it didn't look like him.
He was really old then.
I'm 79 and he's older than me.
He looked good in health.
We were all chatting there.
John said, he knew my sister straight away.
But he didn't know me.
I said, oh well, thank you very much.
But it was a lovely evening.
We were all reminiscing back.
And you could see when we were talking about the factory.
We were loving it.
So you think everybody who worked there felt the same?
I think so, yeah, I really do.
This is why Doreen tried to get into the factory for a long time.
But they weren't taking any more on, you see.
So you thought, you think it had a reputation around here for being a good employer?
Yes, definitely, yeah.